📖 update releasing.md (#916)
metal3-io/cluster-api-provider-metal3: docs/releasing.md

# cluster-api-provider-metal3 releasing

This document details the steps to create a release for
`cluster-api-provider-metal3` aka CAPM3.

## Before making a release

Things you should do before making a release:

> - Uplift controller to use latest corresponding CAPI modules

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Uplift controller go modules to use latest corresponding CAPI modules
```

Author: Fixed.

- Uplift to latest corresponding IPAM module
- Uplift to latest corresponding BMO module
- Uplift any other direct/indirect dependency to close any public
  vulnerabilities

## Permissions

Creating a release requires repository `write` permissions for:

- Tag pushing
- Branch creation
- GitHub Release publishing

These permissions are implicit for the org admins and repository admins.

> Release team gets their permissions via `metal3-release-team` membership. Adding

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Release team gets the permissions via `metal3-release-team` membership. Adding
```

Author: Fixed.

> Release team gets their permissions via `metal3-release-team` membership. Adding

Author: I clarified it is a GitHub team in the metal-3io organization. I don't have access to the organization page where its defined, nor will 99% of the readers. Admins will know where to look.

Fixed the wording.

person to the team gives him/her the necessary rights in all relevant

> repositories in the organization. Individual persons should not be added

Reviewer: Individual persons should not be given the permissions directly.

Author: Fixed.

### `docker`
## Permissions

You must have docker installed.
Creating a release requires repository `write` permissions for:

## Output
- Tag pushing
- Branch creation
- GitHub Release publishing

### Expected artifacts
These permissions are implicit for the org admins and repository admins.
Release team gets their permissions via `metal3-release-team` membership. Adding
person to the team gives him/her the necessary rights in all relevant
repositories in the organization. Individual persons should not be added
directly.

1. A container image of the shared cluster-api-provider-metal3 manager
1. A git tag
1. A release on Github containing:
     - A manifest file - `infrastructure-components.yaml`
     - A metadata file - `metadata.yaml`
     - A cluster template - `cluster-template.yaml`

>      - A file containing an example of variables to set - `example_variables.rc`

Author: That is a good point. I added it back.

> Clone out the repository:

Author: Fixed

> `git clone git@github.com:metal3-io/cluster-api-provider-metal`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`git clone git@github.com:metal3-io/cluster-api-provider-metal3`
```

Author: Fixed.

> or if using existing repository, verify which remote the `metal3-io`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
or if using existing repository, verify your intended remote is set  to `metal3-io`
```

Author: Fixed.

> - If creating a new minor branch, identify the commit your wish to create the

Author: Fixed.

>   `git push origin release-1.x` to create it

Author: CLI is more exact, less prone to change, and easier to document. Rights required are exactly the same.

> First we create a main tag, that triggers release note creation and

Reviewer: main tag means ?

Author: Replaced with primary release tag, so its not confused with actual main branch.

> - Create an signed, annotated tag `git tag -s -a v1.x.y -m v1.x.y`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Create a signed, annotated tag `git tag -s -a v1.x.y -m v1.x.y`
```

Author: Fixed.

> - Create an signed, annotated tag `git tag -s -a v1.x.y -m v1.x.y`

Author: Fixed.

> - Push all of the tags to the GitHub repository `git push origin v1.x.y`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Push the tags to the GitHub repository `git push origin v1.x.y`
```

Author: Fixed.

> - Push all of the tags to the GitHub repository `git push origin v1.x.y`

Author: Fixed.

This triggers two things:

- Release workflow on Github side that creates a draft release with correct

>   content, comparing the tag to previous tag

Author: Fixed.

- Quay starts building release image with the release tag

> We also need to do one or more tags for Go ecosystem:

Author: This changes the intended meaning of the sentence. Subdirectories are discussed in the next sentence. 

Fixed the wording othewise.

- For any directory with `go.mod` in it (excluding `hack/tools`), create another
  Git tag with directory prefix, ie. `git tag -s -a api/v1.x.y -m api/v1.x.y`.
  In this repository, those directories are `api` and `tests`.

>   This is enables the tag to be used as a Go module version for any downstream

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  This enables the tag to be used as a Go module version for any downstream
```

Author: Fixed.

  users.

### Release notes

Next step is to clean up the release note manually.

- Check for duplicates, reverts, and incorrect classifications of PRs, and
  whatever release creation tagged to be manually checked.
- For any superseded PRs (like CAPI uplifts, or commit revertions) that provide
  no value to the release, create a summary line in `Superseded` section with

>   the PR ids and summary title. This way thye are acknowledged to be part of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  the PR ids and summary title. This way the changes are acknowledged to be part of
```

Author: Fixed

>   the release, but not overwhelming the actual changes contained by the release.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  the release, but not overwhelming the important changes contained by the release.
```

Author: Fixed.

- Save the draft.

### Tagging the Ironic and Mariadb images

NOTE: This part will be moved to BMO releasing after BMO release process and
maintenance plan has been agreed on.

> Before publishing CAPM3 release, we need to tag corresponding

Reviewer 2: Not necessarily before capm3 release I would say, but once CAPM3 is published (at least in the past we used to do so)

Author: Why would you want to do them later? When you go public with a release, why'd you intentionally want to have it half-ready? If you face issues tagging the images, or Quay wouldn't build them etc, then your release is broken.

Reviewer 2: I would not recommend tagging it prior CAPM3 tag pushing, since the tag that is used as a prefix for these are the same as CAPM3 tag you will be pushing and you may end up in a situation where users might get confused with these (ironic tags available but not CAPM3, due to some technical reason when you could not push tag in CAPM3). So, IMO it is better to carry out these steps post CAPM3 tag pushing so we are backed up and referencing something that already exists upstream

Author: I'd still argue that before you press the publish button, nobody needs to care (won't even notice really) is more correct approach than publish first, and then scramble. Publishing a release sends out emails to everyone watching repo, might even trigger an automated workflow somewhere, so it is much bigger failure do it that way.

[Ironic-image](https://github.com/metal3-io/ironic-image) and

> [Maridb-image](https://github.com/metal3-io/mariadb-image) repositories.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Mariadb-image](https://github.com/metal3-io/mariadb-image) repositories.
```

Author: Fixed

Those repositories do not have separate releasing process, but for the sake of

> backwards compatibility, each of the CAPM3 releases is tagged in these

Reviewer: ```suggestion
backwards compatibility, for each CAPM3 release we also create tags in these
```

Author: Fixed.

repositories as well.

```bash
# Ironic
git clone git@github.com:metal3-io/ironic-image.git
cd ironic-image
# if retagging old tag, add capm3-v1.x.y^{} to the line, e.g.
# git tag -s -a capm3-v1.x.y -m capm3-v1.x.y capm3-v1.x.y^{}
# this reuses the tag and resolves it into a sha for tagging
git tag -s -a capm3-v1.x.y -m capm3-v1.x.y

> git push origin capm3-v1.x.y

Reviewer 2: I do not have an exact suggestion, but could we reuse this block later instead of repeating it and somehow say: `follow the exact same steps as above` ?

Author: I had it like that before, I'll change it back.

# Mariadb
git clone git@github.com:metal3-io/mariadb-image.git
cd mariadb-image
# if retagging old tag, add capm3-v1.x.y^{} to the line, e.g.
# git tag -s -a capm3-v1.x.y -m capm3-v1.x.y capm3-v1.x.y^{}
# this reuses the tag and resolves it into a sha for tagging
git tag -s -a capm3-v1.x.y -m capm3-v1.x.y
git push origin capm3-v1.x.y
```

After this, [Ironic](https://quay.io/repository/metal3-io/ironic) and

> [Mariadb](https://quay.io/repository/metal3-io/mariadb) images will be built

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Mariadb](https://quay.io/repository/metal3-io/mariadb) container images will be built
```

Author: Fixed.

automatically with `capm3-v1.x.y` tag in Quay.

### Publishing

Go to the releases and edit the draft release created earlier:

> - Make sure Ironic and Mariadb version references are in place and of correct

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Make sure Ironic and Mariadb version references are in place with the correct
```

Author: Fixed.

  version number.

> - If the release you're making isn't the actually latest release (new

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If the release you're making isn't the latest release (new
```

Author: Fixed.

> - If the release you're making isn't the actually latest release (new
>   minor/major or new patch release in the latest minor), uncheck the

Reviewer 2: I think you meant: 

```suggestion
- If the release you're making isn't the actually latest release (new patch release in the latest-1 minor release series), uncheck the
```

Author: I don't get the point about `latest-1` ? 

Fixed the wording otherwise.

Reviewer 2: The confusing part to me here is: if you release any major/minor release, that would always be the latest release and you do not need to uncheck the "latest release" button. 
But, if it is the patch release from the stable branch which is N-1 where N is latest stable branch (i.e you are publishing 1.3.5 patch release from release-1.3 but latest stable branch you have is release-1.4) then you need to uncheck it

Author: There is only one latest release per repo. In GitHub it means the release that is highlighted in the repository main page. 
The only time you tick the latest box is when you release from top off the latest release branch, otherwise must be unticked. Release from 1.2 branch will never be latest if you have 1.3 releases.

I'll see if there is better wording to make this clearer.

  box for latest release.

> - If it is an release candidate, tick pre-release box.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If it is a release candidate(rc) or pre-release , tick pre-release box.
```

Author: Fixed.

- [mariadb:capm3-v1.x.y](https://quay.io/repository/metal3-io/mariadb?tab=tags)

TODO: finish discussion if/how to integrate non-CAPM3 parts here.

Files included in the release page:

- A manifest file - `infrastructure-components.yaml`
- A metadata file - `metadata.yaml`
- A cluster template - `cluster-template.yaml`
- A file containing an example of variables to set - `example_variables.rc`

### Release notes

Next step is to clean up the release note manually.

- Check for duplicates, reverts, and incorrect classifications of PRs, and
  whatever release creation tagged to be manually checked.
- For any superseded PRs (like CAPI uplifts, or commit revertions) that provide
  no value to the release, create a summary line in `Superseded` section with
  the PR ids and summary title. This way the changes are acknowledged to be part
  of the release, but not overwhelming the important changes contained by the
  release.
- Make sure Ironic and Mariadb version references are in place with the correct
  version numbers.
- If the release you're making isn't the latest release (new
  minor or major, or new patch release in the latest minor release),

>   uncheck the box for latest release.

Reviewer 2: This is still confusing to me, though we discussed it earlier iterations, and also as you pointed out, when:

`you release from top off the latest release branch, otherwise must be unticked. Release from 1.2 branch will never be latest if you have 1.3 releases.`

But above, you are mention both new minor and major which should be ticked as latest when you publish one

Author: Fixed, better now?

Reviewer 2: Thanks, it looks a lot better

Reviewer 2: Feel free to resolve it

### Update Metal3-dev-env

Metal3-dev-env variables need to be modified. After a major or minor release,

> the new minor version should point to main for IPAM and the released version

Reviewer 2: why only IPAM and not CAPM3?

Author: Fixed.

should point to the release branch.

WARNING: this breaks metal3-dev-env (CI included) until dev-env and IPAM/CAPM3
repositories are in sync.

### Update testing matrix documentation

> Update [testing matrix documentation](https://github.com/metal3-io/metal3-docs/pull/320)

Reviewer: This should probably point to a file upstream when the PR is merged.

Reviewer 2: or the commit hash

Author: Yes, it'll point to real document link when it gets merged. For now, it points to PR.

to reflect the new release and the combination of components that are tested in
periodic jobs.

## Announcements

We announce the release in Kubernetes slack in `#cluster-api-baremetal` channel

> and email `metal3-dev` list at Google groups.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and through the `metal3-dev` group mailing list.
```

Author: Fixed.
